---
title: Potable Water - An attestation to Lucarelli and Pearson
---

Pearson is terrible... but nevertheless information is needed from it. (Tbh Edward's website practically has the same stuff but Ms Pilling can make any resource good).

This is kind of an amalgamation of Lucarelli and Pearson's information together that hopefully makes sense. BBC also had some pretty accurate info but it's summarised so eh.

## Water (~~Drinkable~~ Potable)
###### (haha imagine 'Essential Water')

Though **we rely heavily on water to sustain us** (55-78% of your body's mass is practically water (might be unbelievable but once you realise blood contains water (edward ~ 'das crazy fr??') it makes sense) by keeping us hydrated, flushing out waste and a whole host of other functions, **we barely have any that will actually help us** (much less kill us). Of the roughly 70% of water that covers our entire planet, 97.3% of it has a saline content (97.2% from the oceans (why is this not helpful? It dehydrates you even more than you already are. Yeah yeah yeah IV drip, electrolyte drinks and the works but those are specially made to support you. And where will all the ocean animals defecate?) while only 2.7% is fresh water. What's even crazier is that roughly 68% (1.836% of all water) of that fresh water is in polar ice caps and glaciers, with 0.6% of total water available being in fresh water in rivers, lakes, swamps and groundwater (how is it 0.6%? I don't know. I also got 0.108% left, but there's obviously factors yk. Polar caps are melting, climate change, Greta Thunberg, pizza boxes from companies that cause emissions innit. Lucarelli is simply on a higher level than us). Not to mention that this water could still have other substances that make it harmful to us, such as pathogens, toxic/carcinogenic organic compounds or contaminants, high levels of salinity or heavy metals. More than remediating the water, controlling the pollutants at their source is far more effective (treating the cause instead of the effect). Even something like clay particles in freshwater may make it undrinkable.

We could keep going on and on about how little water we have to drink but we have a Chemistry CAP to do. So how do we actually get water? The type that is actually drinkable and doesn't cause us to die or have debilitating diseases like cholera or dysentery? Enter ***potable water*** (you can let the word drinkable go now), the type of water that is safe to drink and cook with for humans. The NHMRC (National Health and Medical Research Council) have strict guidelines for potable water, namely that it should be clear, colourless (clear colourless liquid for you observation fans *cough* that was a joke no one likes them), odourless, contain no pathogens or toxic substances and pleasant to taste (choose one or the other (jk). And is water meant to be pleasant to taste? If I drank water and it tasted pleasant I'm diluting my mouth with 3.00 mol L$^{-1}$ solution of ethanol). However, this does not mean it does not have impurities, salts and microbes (THIS DOES NOT MEAN PATHOGENS) present! There are various non-toxic ions and other compounds dissolved in water such as (non-exhaustive list) Na$^+$, K$^+$, Mg$^+$, Cl$^-$, SO$_4^{2-}$, HCO$_3^{-}$, CO$_3^{2-}$, SiO$_4^{2-}$, F$^-$, Fe$^{3+}$, Mn$^{2+}$, NO$_3^-$, NO$_2^-$, PO$_4^{3-}$ and other non-toxic organic matter (what? Something there looked toxic? It's notttt don't worry (it actually isn't get better resources fools). Trust in Lucarelli, the man the myth the legend. There is a toxicity level for all those ions but more often than that level being reached it's toxic metal ions that need to be considered). The way that these are measured through something called Total Dissolved Solids (TDS). Though there isn't an exact limit on TDS, the NHMRC recommends for 'good palatability' that the water should not have TDS that exceeds 600 mg L$^{-1}$.

I am not doing goddamn water cycle this isn't ecology it's chemistry Pearson can go fluoroantimonic acid itself for all I care.

Anyway... Water that is used to produce potable water can come from different sources, mainly being rivers, streams, lakes, reservoirs, groundwater, recycled water (wtf Pearson?) and desalinated seawater (we'll get back to this later). Depending on the source, the water must be treated differently (as different sources have their own problems). The whole of Western Australia has had rivers and dams as traditional water sources. These required mainly disinfection and **fluoridation**. However, now that there are more people and more demand and changing rainfall patterns, drinking water is also being sourced from the Indian Ocean which requires a more intensive treatment to make it potable. The main water source for Perth is desalination water, ground water and reservoirs (according to Pearson), and this is from a supply system (for the South West, the Goldfields and Agricultural regions) called the Integrated Waster Supply System (IWSS). From 2012-2013, the IWSS had supplied 285 billion litres of potable water to more than 1.9 million people, which roughly had a mix of ratio of 40% groundwater, 27% seawater desalination from Kwinana and 33% from another desalination plant at Binningup and surface water (No way Lucarelli and Pearson have non-conflicting information!!1!11!).

### Seawater treatment (yeah i couldn't be bothered sorry Lucarelli)

Seawater (considering there's a lot of it) is the most abundant water source on Earth. Though its ridiculous and dangerously high salinity, usually greater than 35000 mg L$^{-1}$ TDS (almost 60 times more than the recommended amount by NHMRC) requires a significant amount of treatment to make it potable. The main approaches to treat water of this manner is **distillation** and **reverse osmosis** (these terms will be defined later on).

Distillation is practically the same distillation that occurs in laboratories. Water is evaporated from the seawater to separate it from the salt (difference in boiling points; according to Lucarelli it's also because water is actually volatile and salt is not to which is say OOM very poggers 👍 ). The evaporated water is then condensed to produce distilled water which is free of any of the dissolved salts. A process called multi-stage flash distillation is used to thoroughly separate the salts from the water and less energy is needed in the evaporation process, where the evaporation is carried out in several stages at progressively lower pressures. Using a heat exchange process, the heat released by the condensation of water vapour is transferred to incoming cold sea water. Essentially, this is recycling the heat used in evaporating the water (using water's heat insulation properties and convection) to increase energy efficiency. Even though this happens (hey 〜のに moment if you've made it here kento), there is still a high energy demand for distillation of seawater.

Fig 18

Osmosis (the process used for reverse osmosis) is the natural tendency of water to diffuse through semi-permeable membranes (SPM) from a side of low salt concentration to one of a higher salt concentration until the salt concentration of both sides is the same (I assume this will be very important $n=CV$ calculations). Plants use the same process to draw water from soil to their roots. The cell membrane of plants act like SPM's to allow water molecules to pass through, but not larger molecules or salt ions. Most animal cells (including ours) also use the same process to absorb water. This is due to cells maintaining a higher salt concentration than the water surrounding it. Thanks to this process, pure water can be drawn into the cell. Following this, if you (are a psychopath and) water plants with salty water, due to osmosis, the water inside the plant cells would be drawn outside of it into the soil and the plant will wilt from the inside out.

Now getting more on topic, reverse osmosis (RO) uses high pressure to force water through a synthetic SPM in the reverse direction is would usually flow, so from a high salt concentration to a low salt concentration. This is due to the pressure allowing pure water to flow out of the salty feed water (the salty water used) through the SPM. From this, the feed water has its salt concentration increase heavily as about 45% of pure water is separated from it. This pure water is named the permeate (following the pattern you learned in separating techniques, substance that diffuses through the SPM). In this process, ions, larger organic molecules, cellular organisms and viruses cannot pass through the SPM and are separated from the water.

Fig 19

As has been said, since Western Australia uses water from desalination plants, RO is commonly used to produce fresh water for us. Though viruses cannot permeate through SPM, the permeate is still treated through disinfection as some bacteria and some other microbes pass through. A common way of doing this is through fluoridation. After these processes, it can be added to the IWSS or stored away. Though because this water is pure and is deionised, some salts and other substances must be added after this for health and taste reasons, such as carbon dioxide gas and lime. This also allows for a suitable pH to be added and a total dissolved salt (different to TDS) level of about 200 mg L$^{-1}$.

Thanks to the rise of RO and development of technology used for it, the issue of energy consumption for desalination processes has been mitigated, as the power demand is much less for applying pressure rather than trying to convert it to heat energy and distill the water. Roughly third of the energy input for thermal distillation plants is required for RO. Pressure exchange technology, that is technology used to transfer the remaining high pressure of salty wastewater to incoming sea water. With this, the energy requirements for RO plants are reduced by 50-60%.

### Groundwater treatment

About 180 bores (bore water is water drawn from soil and rocks that have rainwater)